
Hexagram: "1 Qian (The Creative)""
Judgment: "The Creative brings success. Perseverance is favorable.""
Line 1.1: "Hidden dragon. Do not act. "
Line 1.2: "Dragon appearing in the field. It furthers one to see the great man.""
Line 1.3: "All day long the superior man is creatively active. At night his mind is still beset with cares. Danger. No blame.""
Line 1.4: "Wavering flight over the depths. No blame.""
Line 1.5: "Flying dragon in the heavens. It furthers one to see the great man.""
Line 1.6: "Arrogant dragon will have cause to repent.""
Lines 1.all: "When all the lines are nines, it means continuous Qian. The superior man works without ceasing.""

Hexagram: "2 K'un (The Receptive)"
Judgment: "The Receptive brings about sublime success, furthering through the perseverance of a mare. If the superior man undertakes something and tries to lead, he goes astray; But if he follows, he finds guidance."
Line 2.1: "When there is hoarfrost underfoot, solid ice is not far off."
Line 2.2: "Straight, square, great. Without purpose, Yet nothing remains unfurthered."
Line 2.3: "Hidden lines. One is able to remain persevering. If by chance you are in the service of a king, seek not works."
Line 2.4: "A tied-up sack. No blame, no praise."
Line 2.5: "A yellow lower garment brings supreme good fortune."
Line 2.6: "Dragons fight in the meadow. Their blood is black and yellow."
Lines 2.all: "Lasting perseverance furthers."

Hexagram: "3 Chun (Difficulty at the Beginning)"
Judgment: "Difficulty at the beginning works supreme success, Furthering through perseverance. Nothing should be undertaken. It furthers one to appoint helpers."
Line 3.1: "Hesitation and hindrance. It furthers one to remain persevering. It furthers one to appoint helpers."
Line 3.2: "Difficulties pile up. Horse and wagon part. He is not a robber; he wants to woo at the right time. The maiden is chaste, she does not pledge herself. Ten years—then she pledges herself."
Line 3.3: "Whoever hunts deer without the forester Only loses his way in the forest. The superior man understands the signs of the time And prefers to desist. To go on brings humiliation."
Line 3.4: "Horse and wagon part. Strive for union. To go brings good fortune. Everything acts to further."
Line 3.5: "Difficulties in blessing. A little perseverance brings good fortune. Great perseverance brings misfortune."
Line 3.6: "Horse and wagon part. Bloody tears flow."

Hexagram: "4 Meng (Youthful Folly)"
Judgment: "Youthful Folly has success. It is not I who seek the young fool; The young fool seeks me. At the first oracle I inform him. If he asks two or three times, it is importunity. If he importunes, I give him no information. Perseverance furthers."
Line 4.1: "To make a fool develop It furthers one to apply discipline. The fetters should be removed. To go on in this way brings humiliation."
Line 4.2: "To bear with fools in kindliness brings good fortune. To know how to take women Brings good fortune. The son is capable of taking charge of the household."
Line 4.3: "Take not a maiden who. When she sees a man of bronze, Loses possession of herself. Nothing furthers."
Line 4.4: "Entangled folly brings humiliation."
Line 4.5: "Childlike folly brings good fortune."
Line 4.6: "In punishing folly It does not further one To commit transgressions. The only thing that furthers Is to prevent transgressions."

Hexagram: "5 Hsu (Waiting [Nourishment])"
Judgment: "Waiting. If you are sincere, you have light and success. Perseverance brings good fortune. It furthers one to cross the great water."
Line 5.1: "Waiting in the meadow. It furthers one to abide in what endures. No blame."
Line 5.2: "Waiting on the sand. There is some gossip. The end brings good fortune."
Line 5.3: "Waiting in the mud Brings about the arrival of the enemy."
Line 5.4: "Waiting in blood. Get out of the pit."
Line 5.5: "Waiting at meat and drink. Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 5.6: "Entering the cave. There are three uninvited guests. Honor them, and in the end there will be good fortune."

Hexagram: "6 Sung (Conflict)"
Judgment: "Conflict. You are sincere And are being obstructed. A cautious halt halfway brings good fortune. Going through to the end brings misfortune. It furthers one to see the great man. It does not further one to cross the great water."
Line 6.1: "If one does not perpetuate the affair, There is a little gossip. In the end, good fortune comes."
Line 6.2: "One cannot engage in conflict; One returns home, gives way. The people of his town, Three hundred households, Remain free of guilt."
Line 6.3: "To nourish oneself on ancient virtue induces perseverance. Danger. In the end, good fortune comes. If you are conscientious, you have light and success."
Line 6.4: "Not at peace. To and fro goes his heart. But his affairs are set right in the end. After his doubts are resolved, Good fortune comes."
Line 6.5: "To contend before him Brings supreme good fortune."
Line 6.6: "Even though by meeting the great man one might suffer disgrace, Without fault."

Hexagram: "7 Shih (The Army)"
Judgment: "The Army. The army needs perseverance and a strong man. Good fortune without blame."
Line 7.1: "An army must set forth in proper order. If the order is not good, misfortune threatens."
Line 7.2: "In the midst of the army. Good fortune. No blame. The king bestows a triple decoration."
Line 7.3: "Perchance the army carries corpses in the wagon. Misfortune."
Line 7.4: "The army retreats. No blame."
Line 7.5: "There is game in the field. It furthers one to catch it. No blame. Let the eldest lead the army. The younger transports corpses; Then perseverance brings misfortune."
Line 7.6: "The great prince issues commands, Founds states, vests families with fiefs. Inferior people should not be employed."

Hexagram: "8 Pi (Holding Together)"
Judgment: "Holding Together brings good fortune. Inquire of the oracle once again Whether you possess sublimity, constancy, and perseverance; Then there is no blame. Those who are uncertain gradually join. Whoever comes too late Meets with misfortune."
Line 8.1: "Hold to him in truth and loyalty; This is without blame. Truth, like a full earthen bowl: Thus in the end Good fortune comes from without."
Line 8.2: "Hold to him inwardly. Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 8.3: "You hold together with the wrong people."
Line 8.4: "Hold to him outwardly also. Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 8.5: "Manifestation of holding together. In the hunt the king uses beaters on three sides only And forgoes game that runs off in front. The citizens need no warning. Good fortune."
Line 8.6: "He finds no head for holding together. Misfortune."

Hexagram: "9 Hsiao Ch'u (The Taming Power of the Small)"
Judgment: "The Taming Power of the Small has success. Dense clouds, no rain from our western region."
Line 9.1: "Return to the way. How could there be blame in this? Good fortune."
Line 9.2: "He allows himself to be drawn into returning. Good fortune."
Line 9.3: "The spokes burst out of the wagon wheels. Man and wife roll their eyes."
Line 9.4: "If you are sincere, blood vanishes and fear gives way. No blame."
Line 9.5: "If you are sincere and loyally attached, You are rich in your neighbor."
Line 9.6: "The rain comes, there is rest. This is due to the lasting effect of character. Perseverance brings the woman into danger. The moon is nearly full. If the superior man persists, Misfortune comes."

Hexagram: "10 Lü (Treading [Conduct])"
Judgment: "Treading upon the tail of the tiger. It does not bite the man. Success."
Line 10.1: "Simple conduct. Progress without blame."
Line 10.2: "Treading a smooth, level course. The perseverance of a dark man Brings good fortune."
Line 10.3: "A one-eyed man is able to see, A lame man is able to tread. He treads on the tail of the tiger. The tiger bites the man. Misfortune. Thus does a warrior act on behalf of his great prince."
Line 10.4: "He treads on the tail of the tiger. Caution and circumspection Lead ultimately to good fortune."
Line 10.5: "Decisive action. Perilous action. No blame."
Line 10.6: "Look to your conduct and weigh the favorable signs. When everything is fulfilled, supreme good fortune comes."

Hexagram: "11 T'ai (Peace)"
Judgment: "Peace. The small departs, the great approaches. Good fortune. Success."
Line 11.1: "When ribbon grass is pulled up, the sod comes with it. Each according to his kind. Undertakings bring good fortune."
Line 11.2: "Bearing with the uncultured in gentleness, Fording the river with resolution, Not neglecting what is distant, Not regarding one's companions: Thus one may manage to walk in the middle."
Line 11.3: "No plain not followed by a slope. No going not followed by a return. He who remains persevering in danger Is without blame. Do not complain about this truth; Enjoy the good fortune you still possess."
Line 11.4: "He flutters down, not boasting of his wealth, Together with his neighbor, Guileless and sincere."
Line 11.5: "The sovereign I Gives his daughter in marriage. This brings blessing And supreme good fortune."
Line 11.6: "The wall falls back into the moat. Use no army now. Make your commands known within your own town. Perseverance brings humiliation."

Hexagram: "12 P'i (Standstill [Stagnation])"
Judgment: "Standstill. Evil people do not further The perseverance of the superior man. The great departs; the small approaches."
Line 12.1: "When ribbon grass is pulled up, the sod comes with it. Each according to his kind. Perseverance brings good fortune and success."
Line 12.2: "They bear and endure; This means good fortune for inferior people. The standstill serves to help the great man to attain success."
Line 12.3: "They bear shame."
Line 12.4: "He who acts at the command of the highest Remains without blame. Those of like mind partake of the blessing."
Line 12.5: "Standstill is giving way. Good fortune for the great man. 'What if it should fail, what if it should fail?' In this way he ties it to a cluster of mulberry shoots."
Line 12.6: "The standstill comes to an end. First standstill, then good fortune."

Hexagram: "13 T'ung Jen (Fellowship with Men)"
Judgment: "Fellowship with Men in the open. Success. It furthers one to cross the great water. The perseverance of the superior man furthers."
Line 13.1: "Fellowship with men at the gate. No blame."
Line 13.2: "Fellowship with men in the clan. Humiliation."
Line 13.3: "He hides weapons in the thicket; He climbs the high hill in front of it. For three years he does not rise up."
Line 13.4: "He climbs up on his wall; he cannot attack. Good fortune."
Line 13.5: "Men bound in fellowship first weep and lament, But afterward they laugh. After great struggles they succeed in meeting."
Line 13.6: "Fellowship with men in the meadow. No remorse."

Hexagram: "14 Ta Yu (Possession in Great Measure)"
Judgment: "Possession in Great Measure. Supreme success."
Line 14.1: "No relationship with what is harmful; There is no blame in this. If one remains conscious of difficulty, One remains without blame."
Line 14.2: "A big wagon for loading. One may undertake something. No blame."
Line 14.3: "A prince offers it to the Son of Heaven. A petty man cannot do this."
Line 14.4: "He makes a difference Between himself and his neighbor. No blame."
Line 14.5: "He whose truth is accessible, yet dignified, Has good fortune."
Line 14.6: "He is blessed by heaven. Good fortune. Nothing that does not further."

Hexagram: "15 Qian (Modesty)"
Judgment: "Modesty creates success. The superior man carries things through."
Line 15.1: "A superior man modest about his modesty May cross the great water. Good fortune."
Line 15.2: "Modesty that comes to expression. Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 15.3: "A superior man of modesty and merit Carries things to conclusion. Good fortune."
Line 15.4: "Nothing that would not further modesty In movement."
Line 15.5: "No boasting of wealth before one's neighbor. It is favorable to attack with force. Nothing that would not further."
Line 15.6: "Modesty that comes to expression. It is favorable to set armies marching To chastise one's own city and one's country."

Hexagram: "16 Yu (Enthusiasm)"
Judgment: "Enthusiasm. It furthers one to install helpers And to set armies marching."
Line 16.1: "Firm as a rock. Not a whole day. Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 16.2: "Firm as a rock, what need of a whole day? The directions for today's assembly are auspicious. Good fortune."
Line 16.3: "Enthusiasm that looks upward creates remorse. Hesitation brings remorse."
Line 16.4: "The source of enthusiasm. He achieves great things. Doubt not. You gather friends around you As a hair clasp gathers the hair."
Line 16.5: "Persistently ill, and still does not die."
Line 16.6: "Deluded enthusiasm. But if after completion one changes, There is no blame."

Hexagram: "17 Sui (Following)"
Judgment: "Following has supreme success. Perseverance furthers. No blame."
Line 17.1: "The standard is changing. Perseverance brings good fortune. To go out of the door in company Produces deeds."
Line 17.2: "If one clings to the little boy, One loses the strong man."
Line 17.3: "If one clings to the strong man, One loses the little boy. Through following one finds what one seeks. It furthers one to remain persevering."
Line 17.4: "Following creates success. Perseverance brings misfortune. To go one's way with sincerity brings clarity. How could there be blame in this?"
Line 17.5: "Sincere in the good. Good fortune."
Line 17.6: "He meets with firm allegiance And is still further bound. The king introduces him To the Western Mountain."

Hexagram: "18 Ku (Work on What Has Been Spoiled [Decay])"
Judgment: "Work on What Has Been Spoiled has supreme success. It furthers one to cross the great water. Before the starting point, three days. After the starting point, three days."
Line 18.1: "Setting right what has been spoiled by the father. If there is a son, No blame rests upon the departed father. Danger. In the end good fortune."
Line 18.2: "Setting right what has been spoiled by the mother. One must not be too persevering."
Line 18.3: "Setting right what has been spoiled by the father. There will be a little remorse. No great blame."
Line 18.4: "Tolerating what has been spoiled by the father. In continuing one sees humiliation."
Line 18.5: "Setting right what has been spoiled by the father. One meets with praise."
Line 18.6: "He does not serve kings and princes, Sets himself higher goals."

Hexagram: "19 Lin (Approach)"
Judgment: "Approach has supreme success. Perseverance furthers. When the eighth month comes, There will be misfortune."
Line 19.1: "Joint approach. Good fortune. Everything furthers."
Line 19.2: "Joint approach. Good fortune. Everything furthers."
Line 19.3: "Comfortable approach. Nothing that would further. If one is induced to grieve over it, No blame."
Line 19.4: "Complete approach. No blame."
Line 19.5: "Wise approach. This brings good fortune and success."
Line 19.6: "Greathearted approach. Good fortune. No blame."

Hexagram: "20 Kuan (Contemplation [View])"
Judgment: "Contemplation. The ablution has been made, But not yet the offering. Full of trust they look up to him."
Line 20.1: "Boy like contemplation. For an inferior man, no blame. For a superior man, humiliation."
Line 20.2: "Contemplation through the crack of the door. Furthering for the perseverance of a woman."
Line 20.3: "Contemplation of my life Decides the choice Between advance and retreat."
Line 20.4: "Contemplation of the light of the kingdom. It furthers one to exert influence as the guest of a king."
Line 20.5: "Contemplation of my life. The superior man is without blame."
Line 20.6: "Contemplation of his life. The superior man is without blame."

Hexagram: "21 Shih Ho (Biting Through)"
Judgment: "Biting Through has success. It is favorable to let justice be administered."
Line 21.1: "His feet are fastened in the stocks, So that his toes disappear. No blame."
Line 21.2: "Bites through tender meat, So that his nose disappears. No blame."
Line 21.3: "Bites on old dried meat And strikes on something poisonous. Slight humiliation. No blame."
Line 21.4: "Biting on dried gristly meat. Receiving metal arrows. It furthers one to be mindful of difficulties And to be persevering. Good fortune."
Line 21.5: "Biting on dried lean meat. Receives yellow gold. Perseveringly aware of danger. No blame."
Line 21.6: "His neck is fastened in the wooden cangue, So that his ears disappear. Misfortune."

Hexagram: "22 Pi (Grace)"
Judgment: "Grace has success. In small matters It is favorable to undertake something."
Line 22.1: "He lends grace to his toes, leaves the carriage, and walks."
Line 22.2: "Lends grace to the beard on his chin."
Line 22.3: "Graceful and moist. Constant perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 22.4: "Grace or simplicity? A white horse comes as if on wings. He is not a robber, He will woo at the right time."
Line 22.5: "Grace in hills and gardens. The roll of silk is meager and small. Humiliation, but in the end good fortune."
Line 22.6: "Simple grace. No blame."

Hexagram: "23 Po (Splitting Apart)"
Judgment: "Splitting Apart. It does not further one to go anywhere."
Line 23.1: "The leg of the bed is split. Those who persevere are destroyed. Misfortune."
Line 23.2: "The bed is split at the edge. Those who persevere are destroyed. Misfortune."
Line 23.3: "He splits with them. No blame."
Line 23.4: "The bed is split up to the skin. Misfortune."
Line 23.5: "A shoal of fishes. Favor comes through the court ladies. Everything acts to further."
Line 23.6: "There is a large fruit still uneaten. The superior man receives a carriage. The house of the inferior man is split apart."

Hexagram: "24 Fu (Return [The Turning Point])"
Judgment: "Return. Success. Going out and coming in without error. Friends come without blame. To and fro goes the way. On the seventh day comes return. It furthers one to have somewhere to go."
Line 24.1: "Return from a short distance. No need for remorse. Great good fortune."
Line 24.2: "Quiet return. Good fortune."
Line 24.3: "Repeated return. Danger. No blame."
Line 24.4: "Walking in the midst of others, One returns alone."
Line 24.5: "Noble-hearted return. No remorse."
Line 24.6: "Missing the return. Misfortune. Misfortune from within and without. If armies are set marching in this way, One will in the end suffer a great defeat, Disastrous for the ruler of the country. For ten years It will not be possible to attack again."

Hexagram: "25 Wu Wang (Innocence [The Unexpected])"
Judgment: "Innocence. Supreme success. Perseverance furthers. If someone is not as he should be, He has misfortune, And it does not further him to undertake anything."
Line 25.1: "Innocent behavior brings good fortune."
Line 25.2: "If one does not count on the harvest while plowing, Nor on the use of the ground while clearing it, It furthers one to undertake something."
Line 25.3: "Undeserved misfortune. The cow that was tethered by someone Is the wanderer's gain, the citizen's loss."
Line 25.4: "He who can be persevering Remains without blame."
Line 25.5: "Use no medicine in an illness Incurred through no fault of your own. It will pass of itself."
Line 25.6: "Innocent action brings misfortune. Nothing furthers."

Hexagram: "26 Ta Ch'u (The Taming Power of the Great)"
Judgment: "The Taming Power of the Great. Perseverance furthers. Not eating at home brings good fortune. It furthers one to cross the great water."
Line 26.1: "Danger is at hand. It furthers one to desist."
Line 26.2: "A big wagon for loading. One may undertake something. No blame."
Line 26.3: "A prince offers it to the Son of Heaven. A petty man cannot do this."
Line 26.4: "He makes a difference Between himself and his neighbor. No blame."
Line 26.5: "He whose truth is accessible, yet dignified, Has good fortune."
Line 26.6: "He is blessed by heaven. Good fortune. Nothing that does not further."

Hexagram: "27 Yi (Nourishment)"
Judgment: "Nourishment. Perseverance furthers. When you look at yourself, it brings good fortune. If you are sincere, you have brightness and success. Perseverance brings good fortune. It furthers one to cross the great water."
Line 27.1: "You let your magic tortoise go, And look at me with the corners of your mouth drooping. Misfortune."
Line 27.2: "Turning to the summit for nourishment, Deviating from the path To seek nourishment from the hill. Continuing to do this brings misfortune."
Line 27.3: "Turning away from nourishment. Perseverance brings misfortune. Do not act thus for ten years. Nothing serves to further."
Line 27.4: "Turning to the summit for provision of nourishment Brings good fortune. Spying about with sharp eyes Like a tiger with insatiable desire. No blame."
Line 27.5: "Turning away from the path. To remain persevering brings good fortune. One should not cross the great water."
Line 27.6: "The source of nourishment. Awareness of danger brings good fortune. It furthers one to cross the great water."

Hexagram: "28 Ta Kuo (Preponderance of the Great)"
Judgment: "Preponderance of the Great. The ridgepole sags to the breaking point. It furthers one to have somewhere to go. Success."
Line 28.1: "The ridgepole is made ready. If there are ulterior motives, it is humiliating."
Line 28.2: "A dry poplar sprouts at the root. An older man takes a young wife. Everything furthers."
Line 28.3: "The ridgepole sags to the breaking point. Misfortune."
Line 28.4: "The ridgepole is braced. Good fortune. If there are ulterior motives, it is humiliating."
Line 28.5: "A withered poplar puts forth flowers. An older woman takes a husband. No blame. No praise."
Line 28.6: "One must go through the water. It goes over one's head. Misfortune. No blame."

Hexagram: "29 K'an (The Abysmal [Water])"
Judgment: "The Abysmal repeated. If you are sincere, you have success in your heart, And whatever you do succeeds."
Line 29.1: "You are in the same boat with your enemy. If you advance, you will encounter danger. A heart-felt communication furthers."
Line 29.2: "The abyss is dangerous. One should strive to attain small things only."
Line 29.3: "Forward and backward, abyss on abyss. In danger like this, pause at first and wait, Otherwise you will fall into a pit in the abyss. Do not act this way."
Line 29.4: "A jug of wine, a bowl of rice with it; Earthen vessels Simply handed in through the window. There is certainly no blame in this."
Line 29.5: "The abyss is not filled to overflowing, It is filled only to the rim. No blame."
Line 29.6: "Bound with cords and ropes, Shut in between thorn-hedged prison walls: For three years one does not find the way. Misfortune."

Hexagram: "30 Li (The Clinging, Fire)"
Judgment: "The Clinging. Perseverance furthers. It brings success. Care of the cow brings good fortune."
Line 30.1: "The footprints run crisscross. If one is seriously intent, no blame."
Line 30.2: "Yellow light. Supreme good fortune."
Line 30.3: "In the light of the setting sun, Men either beat the pot and sing Or loudly bewail the approach of old age. Misfortune."
Line 30.4: "Its coming is sudden; It flames up, dies down, is thrown away."
Line 30.5: "Tears in floods, sighing and lamenting. Good fortune."
Line 30.6: "The king used him to march forth and chastise. Then it is best to kill the leaders And take captive the followers. No blame."
Hexagram: "31 Hsien (Influence [Wooing])"
Judgment: "Influence. Success. Perseverance furthers. To take a maiden to wife brings good fortune."
Line 31.1: "The influence shows itself in the big toe."
Line 31.2: "The influence shows itself in the calves of the legs. Misfortune. Tarrying brings good fortune."
Line 31.3: "The influence shows itself in the thighs. Holds to that which follows it. To continue is humiliating."
Line 31.4: "Perseverance brings good fortune. Remorse disappears. If a man is agitated in mind, And his thoughts go hither and thither, Only those friends On whom he fixes his conscious thoughts Will follow."
Line 31.5: "The influence shows itself in the back of the neck. No remorse."
Line 31.6: "The influence shows itself in the jaws, cheeks, and tongue."

Hexagram: "32 Heng (Duration)"
Judgment: "Duration. Success. No blame. Perseverance furthers. It furthers one to have somewhere to go."
Line 32.1: "Seeking duration too hastily brings misfortune persistently. Nothing that would further."
Line 32.2: "Remorse disappears."
Line 32.3: "He who does not give duration to his character Meets with disgrace. Persistent humiliation."
Line 32.4: "No game in the field."
Line 32.5: "Giving duration to one's character through perseverance. This is good fortune for a woman, misfortune for a man."
Line 32.6: "Restlessness as an enduring condition brings misfortune."

Hexagram: "33 Dun (Retreat)"
Judgment: "Retreat. Success. In what is small, perseverance furthers."
Line 33.1: "At the tail in retreat. This is dangerous. One must not undertake anything."
Line 33.2: "He holds him fast with yellow oxhide. No one can tear him loose."
Line 33.3: "A halted retreat Is nerve-wracking and dangerous. To retain people as a tail on retreat Brings good fortune."
Line 33.4: "Voluntary retreat brings good fortune to the superior man And misfortune to the inferior man."
Line 33.5: "Friendly retreat. Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 33.6: "Cheerful retreat. Everything serves to further."

Hexagram: "34 Ta Chuang (The Power of the Great)"
Judgment: "The Power of the Great. Perseverance furthers."
Line 34.1: "Power in the toes. Continuing brings misfortune. This is certainly true."
Line 34.2: "Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 34.3: "The inferior man works through power. The superior man does not act thus. To continue is dangerous. A goat butts against a hedge And gets its horns entangled."
Line 34.4: "Perseverance brings good fortune. Remorse disappears. The hedge opens; there is no entanglement. Power depends upon the axle of a big cart."
Line 34.5: "Loses the goat with ease. No remorse."
Line 34.6: "A goat butts against a hedge. It cannot retreat, it cannot advance. Nothing serves to further. If one notes the difficulty, This brings good fortune."

Hexagram: "35 Chin (Progress)"
Judgment: "Progress. The powerful prince Is honored with horses in large numbers. In a single day he is granted audience three times."
Line 35.1: "Progressing, but in sorrow."
Line 35.2: "Progressing, but in pleasure. Perseverance brings good fortune. It furthers one to undertake something. It furthers one to cross the great water."
Line 35.3: "All are in accord. Remorse disappears."
Line 35.4: "Progress like a hamster. Perseverance brings danger."
Line 35.5: "Remorse disappears. Take not gain and loss to heart. Undertakings bring good fortune. Everything serves to further."
Line 35.6: "Making progress with the horns is permissible Only for the purpose of punishing one's own city. To be conscious of danger brings good fortune. No blame. Perseverance brings humiliation."

Hexagram: "36 Ming I (Darkening of the Light)"
Judgment: "Darkening of the Light. In adversity It furthers one to be persevering."
Line 36.1: "Darkening of the light during flight. He lowers his wings. The superior man does not eat for three days On his wanderings. But he has somewhere to go. The host has occasion to gossip about him."
Line 36.2: "Darkening of the light injures him in the left thigh. He gives aid with the strength of a horse. Good fortune."
Line 36.3: "Darkening of the light during the hunt in the south. Their great leader is captured. One must not expect perseverance too soon."
Line 36.4: "He penetrates the left side of the belly. One gets at the very heart of the darkening of the light, And leaves gate and courtyard."
Line 36.5: "Darkening of the light as with Prince Chi. Perseverance furthers."
Line 36.6: "Not light but darkness. First he climbed up to heaven, Then plunged into the depths of the earth."

Hexagram: "37 Chia Jen (The Family"

[37.The Clan])
Judgment37.: "The Family. The perseverance of the woman furthers."
Line 37.1: "Firm seclusion within the family. Remorse disappears."
Line 37.2: "She should not follow her whims. She must attend within to the food. Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 37.3: "When tempers flare up in the family, Too great severity brings remorse. Good fortune nonetheless. When woman and child dally and laugh, It leads in the end to humiliation."
Line 37.4: "She is the treasure of the house. Great good fortune."
Line 5: "As a king he approaches his family. Fear not. Good fortune."
Line 6: "His work commands respect. In the end, good fortune comes."

Hexagram: "38 K'uei (Opposition)"
Judgment: "Opposition. In small matters, good fortune."
Line 38.1: "Remorse disappears. If you lose your horse, do not run after it; It will return of its own accord. When you see evil people, Guard yourself against mistakes."
Line 38.2: "One meets his lord in a narrow street. No blame."
Line 38.3: "One sees the wagon dragged back, The oxen halted, A man's hair and nose cut off. Not a good beginning, but a good end."
Line 38.4: "Isolated through opposition, One meets a like-minded man With whom one can associate in good faith. Despite danger, no blame."
Line 38.5: "Remorse disappears. The companion bites his way through the wrappings. If one goes to him, how could it be a mistake?"
Line 38.6: "Isolated through opposition, Seeing one's companion as a pig covered with dirt, As a wagon full of devils. First drawing the bow, Then relaxing the bow. Not a robber, but a suitor. Going to meet him, One may find rain falling. Good fortune comes in the end."

Hexagram: "39 Chien (Obstruction)"
Judgment: "Obstruction. The southwest furthers. The northeast does not further. It furthers one to see the great man. Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 39.1: "Going leads to obstructions, Coming meets with praise."
Line 39.2: "The King's servant is beset by obstruction upon obstruction, But it is not his own fault."
Line 39.3: "Going leads to obstructions; Hence he comes back."
Line 39.4: "Going leads to obstructions, Coming leads to union."
Line 39.5: "In the midst of the greatest obstructions, Friends come."
Line 39.6: "Going leads to obstructions, Coming brings great good fortune. It furthers one to see the great man."

Hexagram: "40 Hsieh (Deliverance)"
Judgment: "Deliverance. The southwest furthers. If there is no longer anything where one has to go, Return brings good fortune. If there is still something where one has to go, Hastening brings good fortune."
Line 40.1: "Without blame."
Line 40.2: "One kills three foxes in the field And receives a yellow arrow. Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 40.3: "If one is not extremely careful, Somebody may come up from behind and strike him. Misfortune."
Line 40.4: "Deliverance from your tail. No blame."
Line 40.5: "The prince shoots at a hawk on a high wall. He kills it. Everything serves to further."
Line 40.6: "The bird's nest is disturbed. The traveler first laughs, then must lament and weep. Through carelessness he loses his cow. Misfortune."

Hexagram: "41 Sun (Decrease)"
Judgment: "Decrease combined with sincerity Brings about supreme good fortune Without blame. One may be persevering in this. It furthers one to undertake something. How is this to be carried out? One may use two small bowls for the sacrifice."
Line 41.1: "Going quickly when one's tasks are finished Is without blame. But one must reflect on how much one may decrease others."
Line 41.2: "Perseverance furthers. To undertake something brings misfortune. Without decreasing oneself, One is able to bring increase to others."
Line 41.3: "When three people journey together, Their number decreases by one. When one man journeys alone, He finds a companion."
Line 41.4: "If one decreases his faults, It makes the other hasten to come and rejoice. No blame."
Line 41.5: "Someone does indeed increase him. Ten pairs of tortoises cannot oppose it. Supreme good fortune."
Line 41.6: "If one is increased without depriving others, There is no blame. Perseverance brings good fortune. It furthers one to undertake something. One obtains servants But no longer has a separate home."

Hexagram: "42 I (Increase)"
Judgment: "Increase. It furthers one to undertake something. It furthers one to cross the great water."
Line 42.1: "It furthers one to accomplish great deeds. Supreme good fortune. No blame."
Line 42.2: "Someone does indeed increase him; Ten pairs of tortoises cannot oppose it. Constant perseverance brings good fortune. The king presents him before God. Good fortune."
Line 42.3: "One is enriched through unfortunate events. No blame, if you are sincere And walk in the middle, And report with a seal to the prince."
Line 42.4: "If you walk in the middle And report to the prince, He will follow. It furthers one to be used In the removal of the capital."
Line 42.5: "If in truth you have a kind heart, ask not. Supreme good fortune. Truly, kindness will be recognized as your virtue."
Line 42.6: "He brings increase to his mother. He does not keep his riches for himself. No blame. Perseverance brings good fortune. He has the benefit of what brings good fortune. When he makes increase, there are no regrets."

Hexagram: "43 Kuai (Break-through [Resoluteness])"
Judgment: "Break-through. One must resolutely make the matter known At the court of the king. It must be announced truthfully. Danger. It is necessary to notify one's own city. It does not further to resort to arms. It furthers one to undertake something."
Line 43.1: "Mighty in the forward-striding toes. When one goes and is not equal to the task, One makes a mistake."
Line 43.2: "A cry of alarm. Arms at evening and at night. Fear nothing."
Line 43.3: "To be powerful in the cheekbones Brings misfortune. The superior man is firmly resolved. He walks alone and is caught in the rain. He is bespattered, And people murmur against him. No blame."
Line 43.4: "There is no skin on his thighs, And walking comes hard. If one is mindful of the danger, No great mistake is made."
Line 43.5: "No fish in the tank. This leads to misfortune."
Line 43.6: "A melon covered with willow leaves. Hidden lines. Then it drops down to one from heaven."

Hexagram: "44 Kou (Coming to Meet)"
Judgment: "Coming to Meet. The maiden is powerful. One should not marry such a maiden."
Line 44.1: "It must be checked with a brake of bronze. Perseverance brings good fortune. If one lets it take its course, one experiences misfortune. Even a lean pig has it in him to rage around."
Line 44.2: "There is a fish in the tank. No blame. Does not further guests."
Line 44.3: "There is no skin on his thighs, And walking comes hard. If one is careful, No great harm is done."
Line 44.4: "No fish in the tank. This leads to misfortune."
Line 44.5: "A melon covered with willow leaves. Hidden lines. Then it drops down to one from heaven."
Line 44.6: "He comes to meet with his horns. Humiliation. No blame."

Hexagram: "45 Ts'ui (Gathering Together [Massing])"
Judgment: "Gathering Together. Success. The king approaches his temple. It furthers one to see the great man. This brings success. Perseverance furthers. To bring great offerings creates good fortune. It furthers one to undertake something."
Line 45.1: "If you are sincere, but not to the end, There will sometimes be confusion, sometimes gathering together. If you call out, Then after one grasp of the hand you can laugh again. Regret not. Going is without blame."
Line 45.2: "Letting oneself be drawn Brings good fortune and remains blameless. If one is sincere, It furthers one to bring even a small offering."
Line 45.3: "Gathering together amid sighs. Nothing that would further. Going is without blame. Slight humiliation."
Line 45.4: "Great good fortune. No blame."
Line 45.5: "If in gathering together one has position, This brings no blame. If there are some who are not yet sincerely in the work, Sublime and enduring perseverance is needed. Then remorse disappears."
Line 45.6: "Lamenting and sighing, floods of tears. No blame."

Hexagram: "46 Sheng (Pushing Upward)"
Judgment: "Pushing Upward has supreme success. One must see the great man. Fear not. Departure toward the south brings good fortune."
Line 46.1: "Pushing upward that meets with confidence Brings great good fortune."
Line 46.2: "If one is sincere, It furthers one to bring even a small offering. No blame."
Line 46.3: "One pushes upward into an empty city."
Line 46.4: "The king offers him Mount Ch'i. Good fortune. No blame."
Line 46.5: "Perseverance brings good fortune. One pushes upward by steps."
Line 46.6: "Pushing upward in darkness. It furthers one to be unremittingly persevering."

Hexagram: "47 K'un (Oppression [Exhaustion])"
Judgment: "Oppression. Success. Perseverance. The great man brings about good fortune. No blame. When one has something to say, It is not believed."
Line 47.1: "One sits oppressed under a bare tree And strays into a gloomy valley. For three years one sees nothing."
Line 47.2: "One is oppressed while at meat and drink. The man with the scarlet knee bands is just coming. It furthers one to offer sacrifice. To set out to bring order to one's affairs brings good fortune."
Line 47.3: "One is oppressed by stones. One enters into a gloomy valley. For three years one encounters nothing."
Line 47.4: "Coming very quietly, oppressed in a golden carriage. Humiliation, but the end is reached."
Line 47.5: "His nose and feet are cut off. Oppression at the hands of the man with the purple knee bands. Joy comes softly. It furthers one to make offerings and libations."
Line 47.6: "He is oppressed by creeping vines. He moves uncertainly and says, 'Movement brings remorse.' If one feels remorse over this and makes a start, Good fortune comes."

Hexagram: "48 Ching (The Well)"
Judgment: "The Well. The town may be changed, But the well cannot be changed. It neither decreases nor increases. They come and go and draw from the well. If one gets down almost to the water And the rope does not go all the way, Or the jug breaks, it brings misfortune."
Line 48.1: "The well is muddy. No drinking. Old well, no birds."
Line 48.2: "At the wellhole one shoots fishes. The jug is broken and leaks."
Line 48.3: "The well is cleaned, but no one drinks from it. This is my heart's sorrow, For one might draw from it. If the king were clear-minded, Good fortune might be enjoyed in common."
Line 48.4: "The well is lined. No blame."
Line 48.5: "In the well there is a clear, cold spring From which one can drink."
Line 48.6: "One draws from the well Without hindrance. It is dependable. Supreme good fortune."

Hexagram: "49 Ko (Revolution [Molting])"
Judgment: "Revolution. On your own day You are believed. Supreme success, Furthering through perseverance. Remorse disappears."
Line 49.1: "Wrapped in the hide of a yellow cow."
Line 49.2: "When one's own day comes, one may create revolution. Starting brings good fortune. No blame."
Line 49.3: "Starting brings misfortune. Perseverance brings danger. When talk of revolution is brought up, One may commit murder."
Line 49.4: "Remorse disappears. Men believe him. Changing the mandate, one is in accord. Good fortune."
Line 49.5: "Great good fortune. No blame."
Line 49.6: "Regret vanishes. Have confidence. Change decree and action brings honor."

Hexagram: "50 Ting (The Caldron)"
Judgment: "The Caldron. Supreme good fortune. Success."
Line 50.1: "A ting with legs upturned. Furthers removal of stagnating stuff. One takes a concubine for the sake of her son. No blame."
Line 50.2: "There is food in the ting. My comrades are envious, But they cannot harm me. Good fortune."
Line 50.3: "The handle of the ting is altered. One is impeded in his way of life. The fat of the pheasant is not eaten. Once rain falls, remorse is spent. Good fortune comes in the end."
Line 50.4: "The legs of the ting are broken. The prince's meal is spilled And his person is soiled. Misfortune."
Line 50.5: "The ting has yellow handles, golden carrying rings. Perseverance furthers."
Line 50.6: "The ting has rings of jade. Great good fortune. Nothing that would not further."

Hexagram: "51 Chen (The Arousing [Shock, Thunder])"
Judgment: "Shock brings success. Shock comes-oh, oh! Laughing words-ha, ha! The shock terrifies for a hundred miles, And he does not let fall the sacrificial spoon and chalice."
Line 51.1: "Shock comes-oh, oh! Then follow laughing words-ha, ha! Good fortune."
Line 51.2: "Shock comes bringing danger. A hundred thousand times You lose your treasures And must climb the nine hills. Do not go in pursuit of them. After seven days you will get them back."
Line 51.3: "Shock comes and makes one distraught. If shock spurs to action One remains free of misfortune."
Line 51.4: "Shock is mired."
Line 51.5: "Shock goes hither and thither. Danger. However, nothing at all is lost. Yet there are things to be done."
Line 51.6: "Shock brings ruin and terrified gazing around. Going ahead brings misfortune. If it has not yet touched one's own body But has reached one's neighbor first, There is no blame. One's comrades have something to talk about."

Hexagram: "52 Ken (Keeping Still, Mountain)"
Judgment: "Keeping Still, Mountain. Keeping his back still So that he no longer feels his body. He goes into his courtyard And does not see his people. No blame."
Line 52.1: "Keeping his toes still. No blame. Continued perseverance furthers."
Line 52.2: "Keeping his calves still. He cannot rescue him whom he follows. His heart is not glad."
Line 52.3: "Keeping his hips still. Making his lower back stiff. Dangerous. The heart suffocates."
Line 52.4: "Keeping his trunk still. No blame."
Line 52.5: "Keeping his jaws still. The words have order. Remorse disappears."
Line 52.6: "Noblehearted keeping still. Good fortune."

Hexagram: "53 Jian (Development [Gradual Progress])"
Judgment: "Development. The maiden is given in marriage. Good fortune. Perseverance furthers."
Line 53.1: "The wild goose gradually approaches the shore. The young son is in danger. There is talk. No blame."
Line 53.2: "The wild goose gradually approaches the cliff. Eating and drinking in peace and concord. Good fortune."
Line 53.3: "The wild goose gradually approaches the plateau. The man goes forth and does not return. The woman carries a child but does not bring it forth. Misfortune. It furthers one to fight off robbers."
Line 53.4: "The wild goose gradually approaches the tree. Perhaps it will find a flat branch. No blame."
Line 53.5: "The wild goose gradually approaches the summit. For three years the woman has no child. In the end nothing can hinder her. Good fortune."
Line 53.6: "The wild goose gradually approaches the cloud heights. Its feathers can be used for the sacred dance. Good fortune."

Hexagram: "54 Kuei Mei (The Marrying Maiden)"
Judgment: "The Marrying Maiden. Undertakings bring misfortune. Nothing that would further."
Line 54.1: "The marrying maiden as a concubine. A lame man who is able to tread. Undertakings bring good fortune."
Line 54.2: "A one-eyed man who is able to see. The perseverance of a solitary man furthers."
Line 54.3: "The marrying maiden as a slave. She marries as a concubine."
Line 54.4: "The marrying maiden draws out the allotted time. A late marriage comes in due course."
Line 54.5: "The sovereign I gave his daughter in marriage. The embroidered garments of the princess Were not as gorgeous As those of the servingmaid. The moon that is nearly full Brings good fortune."
Line 54.6: "The woman holds the basket, but there are no fruits in it. The man stabs the sheep, but no blood flows. Nothing that acts to further."

Hexagram: "55 Feng (Abundance [Fullness])"
Judgment: "Abundance has success. The king attains abundance. Be not sad. Be like the sun at midday."
Line 55.1: "When a man meets his destined ruler, They can be together ten days, And it is not a mistake. Going meets with recognition."
Line 55.2: "The curtain is of such fullness That the polestars can be seen at noon. Through going one meets with mistrust and hate. If one rouses him through truth, Good fortune comes."
Line 55.3: "The underbrush is of such abundance That the small stars can be seen at noon. He breaks his right arm. No blame."
Line 55.4: "The curtain is of such fullness That the polestars can be seen at noon. He meets his ruler, who is of like kind. Good fortune."
Line 55.5: "Lines are coming, Blessing and fame draw near. Good fortune."
Line 55.6: "His house is in a state of abundance. He screens off his family. He peers through the gate And no longer perceives anyone. For three years he sees nothing. Misfortune."

Hexagram: "56 Lu (The Wanderer)"
Judgment: "The Wanderer. Success through smallness. Perseverance brings good fortune To the wanderer."
Line 56.1: "If the wanderer busies himself with trivial things, He draws down misfortune upon himself."
Line 56.2: "The wanderer comes to an inn. He has his property with him. He wins the steadfastness of a young servant."
Line 56.3: "The wanderer's inn burns down. He loses the steadfastness of his young servant. Danger."
Line 56.4: "The wanderer rests in a shelter. He obtains his property and an ax. My heart is not glad."
Line 56.5: "He shoots a pheasant. It drops with the first arrow. In the end this brings both praise and office."
Line 56.6: "The bird burns its nest. The wanderer first laughs, Then must lament and weep. Through carelessness he loses his cow. Misfortune."

Hexagram: "57 Sun (The Gentle [The Penetrating, Wind])"
Judgment: "The Gentle. Success through what is small. It furthers one to have somewhere to go. It furthers one to see the great man."
Line 57.1: "Advance and retreat, Advantage in steadfastness and virtue."
Line 57.2: "Penetrating under the bed. Priests and magicians are used in great number. Good fortune. No blame."
Line 57.3: "Repeated penetration. Humiliation."
Line 57.4: "Remorse vanishes. During the hunt Three kinds of game are caught."
Line 57.5: "Perseverance brings good fortune. Remorse vanishes. Nothing that does not further. No beginning, but an end. Before the change, three days. After the change, three days. Good fortune."
Line 57.6: "Penetrating under the bed. He loses his property and his ax. Perseverance brings misfortune."

Hexagram: "58 Tui (The Joyous, Lake)"
Judgment: "The Joyous. Success. Perseverance is favorable."
Line 58.1: "Contented joyousness. Good fortune."
Line 58.2: "Sincere joyousness. Good fortune. Remorse disappears."
Line 58.3: "Coming joyousness. Misfortune."
Line 58.4: "Joyousness that is weighed is not at peace. After ridding himself of mistakes a man has joy."
Line 58.5: "Sincerity toward disintegrating influences is dangerous."
Line 58.6: "Seductive joyousness."

Hexagram: "59 Huan (Dispersion [Dissolution])"
Judgment: "Dispersion. Success. The king approaches his temple. It furthers one to cross the great water. Perseverance furthers."
Line 59.1: "He brings help with the strength of a horse. Good fortune."
Line 59.2: "At the dissolution He hurries to that which supports him. Remorse disappears."
Line 59.3: "He dissolves his self. No remorse."
Line 59.4: "He dissolves his bond with his group. Supreme good fortune. Dispersion leads in turn to accumulation. This is something that ordinary men do not think of."
Line 59.5: "His loud cries are as dissolving as sweat. Dissolution! A king abides without blame."
Line 59.6: "He dissolves his blood. Departing, keeping at a distance, going out, Is without blame."

Hexagram: "60 Chieh (Limitation)"
Judgment: "Limitation. Success. Galling limitation must not be persevered in."
Line 60.1: "Not going out of the door and the courtyard Is without blame."
Line 60.2: "Not going out of the gate and the courtyard Brings misfortune."
Line 60.3: "He who knows no limitation Will have cause to lament. No blame."
Line 60.4: "Contented limitation. Success."
Line 60.5: "Sweet limitation brings good fortune. Going brings esteem."
Line 60.6: "Galling limitation. Perseverance brings misfortune. Remorse disappears."

Hexagram: "61 Chung Fu (Inner Truth)"
Judgment: "Inner Truth. Pigs and fishes. Good fortune. It furthers one to cross the great water. Perseverance furthers."
Line 61.1: "Being prepared brings good fortune. If there are secret designs, it is disquieting."
Line 61.2: "A crane calling in the shade. Its young answers it. I have a good goblet. I will share it with you."
Line 61.3: "He finds a comrade. Now he beats the drum, now he stops. Now he sobs, now he sings."
Line 61.4: "The moon nearly at the full. The team horse goes astray. No blame."
Line 61.5: "He possesses truth, which links together. No blame."
Line 61.6: "Cockcrow penetrating to heaven. Perseverance brings misfortune."

Hexagram: "62 Hsiao Kuo (Preponderance of the Small)"
Judgment: "Preponderance of the Small. Success. Perseverance furthers. Small things may be done; great things should not be done. The flying bird brings the message: It is not well to strive upward, It is well to remain below. Great good fortune."
Line 62.1: "Flying bird leaves him. Misfortune. This is called calamity and blundering."
Line 62.2: "She passes by her ancestor And meets her ancestress. He does not reach his prince And meets the official. No blame."
Line 62.3: "If one is not extremely careful, Somebody may come up from behind and strike him. Misfortune."
Line 62.4: "No blame. He meets him without passing by. Going brings danger. One must be on guard. Do not act. Be cautious."
Line 62.5: "Dense clouds, No rain from our western territory. The prince shoots and hits him who is in the cave."
Line 62.6: "He passes him by, not meeting him. The flying bird leaves him, Misfortune. This means calamity and blundering."

Hexagram: "63 Chi Chi (After Completion)"
Judgment: "After Completion. Success in small matters. Perseverance furthers. At the beginning good fortune, At the end disorder."
Line 63.1: "He breaks his wheels. He gets his tail in the water. No blame."
Line 63.2: "The woman loses the curtain of her carriage. Do not run after it; On the seventh day you will get it."
Line 63.3: "The Illustrious Ancestor Disciplines the Devil's Country. After three years he conquers it. Inferior people must not be employed."
Line 63.4: "The finest clothes turn to rags. Be careful all day long."
Line 63.5: "The neighbor in the east who slaughters an ox Does not attain as much real happiness As the neighbor in the west With his small offering."
Line 63.6: "He gets his head in the water. Danger."

Hexagram: "64 Wei Chi (Before Completion)"
Judgment: "Before Completion. Success. But if the little fox, after nearly completing the crossing, Gets his tail in the water, There is nothing that would further."
Line 64.1: "He gets his tail in the water. Humiliating."
Line 64.2: "He brakes his wheels. Perseverance brings good fortune."
Line 64.3: "Before completion, attack brings misfortune. It furthers one to cross the great water."
Line 64.4: "Perseverance brings good fortune. Remorse disappears. Shock, thus to discipline the Devil's Country. For three years, great realms are awarded."
Line 64.5: "Perseverance brings good fortune. No remorse. The light of the superior man is true. Good fortune."
Line 64.6: "There is drinking of wine In genuine confidence. No blame. But if one wets his head, He loses it, "
